# Delegation of Power

This blog is written in The Netherlands. The Netherlands are a democratic constitutional state. Citizens delegate power to the government through political stuctures. The government enforces rules and offers services that benefit all of us, and that we pay for collectively (often with healthy reluctance). Even the government has to justify its behaviour before a court of justice when there is doubt about whether all actions were according to agreement. However, the government is not the only institution that we delegate power to. As consumers we delegate power to producers. When we go into debt we delegate power to banks. In politics, the 'free' market and the financial world alike, the checks and balances to see whether this delegated power is wielded responsibly are limited. The means to make adjustments are even more restricted, especially for individual citizens. A seat in the parliament that is obtained by making untenable promises, can be used to arrange more advantages for groups that are already well-to-do. Products that are manufactured with huge damage to people and environment in poor countries, push responsibly manufactured goods out of the market. Stolen or fraudulently obtained money is, after laundering, indis&shy;tinguishable from honest money.

According to [Conway’s Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law) every organisation that designs something, necessarily produces a design that mirrors the communication structure of that organisation. Behind the touchscreen of our phone, all software works with client-server technologies. The client-server model is intrinsically unequal. The client is just a thin presentation layer and the server is all-powerful. Servers are concentrated in the data centers of a few cloud-providers that are elusive (because of globalisation). The algorithms that influence the behavior of virtially every human being on earth, are out of reach for governmental regulation. Political concerns should not be limited to the settings of the controls that are provided by big-tech companies. Governments should demand that controls must be included that can be used to constrain excesses and governments should ensure the availabiliy of technologies that allow citizens to communicate with family, friends, banks and government without requiring them to give up sovereignty over their data.

For decades now, at least in The Netherlands, minister-presidents and their cabinets have been *managing* rather than *leading* the government. On the other hand there are clear signals that for many people this stategy of global financial optimisation greatly reduces their prospects for the future. At this point in time, financial power has become very concentrated and elusive (again, because of globalisation). So much so that financial power can be used to obtain privileges. In other words: rich people and organisations are subject to different laws than ordinary people and small and medium-sized companies. In the not so distant future there will be a time when democratic political power is no longer a healthy opposition for financial power. Then inequality will become irreversable. We need a clear vision to put other than financial interests on the agenda and to act accordingly.

I get the impression that many people lost their bearings and make decisions based on an unrealistically simplified view of the world. A lot of these decisions only make things worse for ourselves. I think that our political representatives are obligated to pass legislation that ensure the continuity of our democratic constitutional state. I feel that the (largely government subsidised) scientific community is obligated to help political bodies to estimate how likely proposed legislation is to accomplish the desired goal.

Given the current, in my view unhealthy, concentration of power in organisations that are hard to regulate and are purely driven by financial goals, I think that the best strategy for governments is to help develop alternatives for exchange of messages and financial activities that leave the power to act with the citizen / consumer / user. When citizens delegate substantially less power, then the organisations that misuse delegated power will just evaporate.

I am sure that research is being done already to investigate co-operative systems that are designed based on participation rather than on the delegation of power to a central authority. An "inverse Conway manoeuvre" is necessary to make the use of this type op system commonplace: communication structures that are based on participation — in the digital domain: peer-to-peer — must be encouraged and protected in order for them to become a real factor in the dynamic of our society.
